Queries - Overview (#388)
wormhole-foundation/wormhole-docs: products/queries/overview.md

---
title: Queries Overview
description: Learn how Wormhole Queries enable smart contracts to fetch real-time, Guardian-verified data across multiple blockchains.
categories: Queries
---

# Queries Overview 

> Queries provide on-demand access to Guardian-attested on-chain data. They allow smart contracts to fetch real-time, verifiable data, such as prices, rates, and liquidity, from across the multichain ecosystem.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Queries provide on-demand access to Guardian-attested on-chain data. They allow smart contracts to fetch real-time, verifiable data from across the multichain ecosystem, such as prices, rates, and liquidity.
```

- **Guardian attested** – all data is signed by [Guardians](/docs/protocol/infrastructure/guardians/){target=\_blank} for trustless validation
- **Cross-chain ready** – request data on one chain, use it on another
- **Smart contract integration** – results are delivered as [Verified Action Approvals (VAAs)](/docs/protocol/infrastructure/vaas/){target=\_blank}, readable by smart contracts
- **Chain agnostic** – works across supported EVM chains, Solana, Sui, and [more](/docs/products/queries/reference/supported-networks/){target=\_blank}

## How It Works

A query request follows a simple but robust lifecycle:

1. An off-chain app sends a query to the Query Server via HTTPS
2. The Query Server checks the request and shares it with [Guardians](/docs/protocol/infrastructure/guardians/){target=\_blank}
3. [Guardians](/docs/protocol/infrastructure/guardians/){target=\_blank} independently fetch the data, verify it, and sign the result
4. Once enough Guardians (2/3 quorum) return matching results, the Query Server aggregates and sends the final response
5. The off-chain app submits this result to a smart contract, which verifies the Guardian signatures and uses the data

> The Query Server is permissioned but trustless. Most queries resolve in under one second, and Guardians retry failed requests for up to one minute. To optimize performance, up to 255 queries can be batched together, supporting efficient multi-chain workflows.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The Query Server is permissioned but trustless. Most queries resolve in under one second, and Guardians retry failed requests for up to one minute. Up to 255 queries can be batched together to optimize performance, supporting efficient multichain workflows.
```

> ![The architecture flow of a query](/docs/images/products/queries/overview/overview-1.webp)

Reviewer 2: Nice! The diagram refers to the query server as the CCQ server, so maybe we should draw that connection at first mention of query server

    - [**Queries**](/docs/products/queries/get-started/){target=\_blank} – fetch rates and prices in real-time
    - [**Messaging**](/docs/products/messaging/get-started/){target=\_blank} – sync actions between chains
    - [**Native Token Transfer**](/docs/products/native-token-transfers/get-started/){target=\_blank} – transfer collateral as native assets

- **Cross-Chain Swaps and Liquidity Aggregation (e.g., [StellaSwap](https://app.stellaswap.com/exchange/swap){target=\_blank})**

    - [**Queries**](/docs/build/queries/overview/){target=\_blank} – fetch live prices optimal trade execution
    - [**Wormhole Connect**](/docs/products/connect/overview/){target=\_blank} – handle user-friendly asset transfers
    - [**Native Token Transfer**](/docs/products/native-token-transfers/overview/){target=\_blank} – moves native tokens

- **Real-Time Price Feeds and Trading Strategies (e.g., [Infinex](https://wormhole.com/case-studies/infinex){target=\_blank})**

    - [**Queries**](/docs/build/queries/overview/){target=\_blank} – fetch price feeds 
    - [**Messaging**](/docs/protocol/infrastructure/){target=\_blank} – trigger trades

> 

Reviewer 2: Some are linking to get started, some are linking to overview - we should be consistent. Let's throw them to the overview pages

- **Multichain Prediction Markets**

    - [**Queries**](/docs/build/queries/overview/){target=\_blank} – fetch market data and odds
    - [**Wormhole Settlement**](/docs/learn/transfers/settlement/overview/){target=\_blank} – automates token execution

- **Oracle Networks (e.g., [Pyth](https://wormhole.com/case-studies/pyth){target=\_blank})**

    - [**Queries**](/docs/build/queries/overview/){target=\_blank} –  source data from chains
    - [**Messaging**](/docs/protocol/infrastructure/){target=\_blank} – ensures tamper-proof data relay across networks

## Next Steps

Follow these steps to get started with Queries:

> [timeline(wormhole-docs/.snippets/text/products/queries/queries-timeline.json)]

Reviewer 2: While this is a solid set of next steps, I'm just a little unsure about this because I feel like we should be pushing users to the get started guide

Reviewer 3: I agree. The get started guide should be mentioned, and then they can explore the other pages mentioned here.

Reviewer: Agree. Get Started with Queries should be first and then the others. Thank you!
